---
layout: post
title: About Us
created: 1235865600
categories:
- lifeblooddesign
---
## About Us

Lifeblood Design is a consulting and solutions design firm which is comprised of a loosely affiliated posse of consultants, geeks, creative problem solvers and collaborators which are brought in for specific projects as their talents and expertise is required.

Here's some background about our founder, which may also help clarify the kinds of projects we tend to rally around.

## Arthur Brock

Arthur Brock builds targeted currencies that are at the core of the emerging post-industrial economy. He has created more than 100 designs for multi-currency systems and his software company has built and deployed dozens of those systems.

Initially, Arthur put his degree in Artificial Intelligence to use at GM, Chrysler & Hughes, but he soon realized he was committed to bringing intelligence to social architectures rather than to computers. He started student-run schools and award-winning, employee-run businesses and discovered that the self-managing feedback loops needed to operate these types of organizations were built on particular patterns of incentives and measurement. He began to unlock the social DNA by which groups operate and uncover the critical role of currencies as carriers of that social DNA.

Arthur’s designs include currency systems for: collaborative scientific research, sustainable fishery management, corporate compensation plans, employee stock options, community-based economic development, business barter and exchange, triple-bottom-line trade credits, open source software development, customer loyalty programs, water rights, recirculating gift certificates, community service, employee performance management, arts & culture development, efficient resource sharing & management, and community & environmental impact assessment.

Based in Denver, Colorado, Arthur Brock consults worldwide with organizations which are actively restructuring themselves for the new economy.

## Partners in Design & Creation

We have an amazing cast of characters with diverse talents and passions that we draw upon. These are some of the people that may work with you on your project:

[ coming soon... pictures + one sentence + social media links for everyone! ]
