---
layout: post
title: Who should issue our currency?
created: 1414898758
categories:
- money
- decentralization
- currencies
---
<p><strong>The concept is really simple.</strong></p><p><span style="line-height: 1.5;">Since it is ALL OF US who create value, I believe it is ALL OF US who need to maintain our capacities to choose how to measure and account for the value we create.</span></p><p>If we surrender this ability to any special or narrow interest group (and like it or not, the government is one of those) then we surrender control of the value we create.</p><p>Let&#39;s be very clear -- there is no such thing as a value-neutral currency. &nbsp;Every currency embodies particular values by WHAT it measure or fails to measure and HOW it measures it. &nbsp;No single currency can value everything equally; that would be the same as valuing nothing. &nbsp;</p><p>We need a free market for currencies more than we need a free market for goods and services. &nbsp;In fact, different currencies have the capacities to create different markets with different value gradients -- values based not only on scarcity and control.</p><p>Until currency making capacities are in the hands of the general populace we are functionally blind to the plurality of value that actually makes the world work. &nbsp;In other words, without a rich ecosystem of currencies which reflect the richness of values of their participants, our world is broken -- we will have neither social equality nor environmental sustainability.</p><p><strong>The execution is not so simple.</strong></p><p>We have discovered that what it really takes to build truly peered currency systems is truly peered computing architectures. We don&#39;t really have those yet. At least not ones that meet our requirements. Hence all the lower level work we&#39;ve been doing on Ceptr as a platform for having a self-decribing protocol stack that lets everying talk to everything on decentralized computing architecture.</p><p>We have a lot more work to do on Ceptr... but what is unfolding is exciting and you can find out more about it here: <a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Line362Wm0zMOZcEZMqPYfHqNS4XIVyVsP7SS_4jE2o/edit#">Ceptr Apocalypse</a></p>
