---
layout: post
title: Some Thoughts about Feedback Loops
created: 1415075039
categories:
- upward spirals
- system dynamics
- living systems
- flows
- flow
- feedback loops
- currency design
---
<p>These are notes in progress about how feedback loops work... not complete... nor necessarily intended to be understandable by others yet... all partially formed.&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Coupling / Uncoupling</strong> &ndash; when you connect the &ldquo;output&rdquo; of something more directly to the factors affecting its &ldquo;inputs&rdquo; it becomes more tightly coupled.&nbsp; You uncouple feedback by inserting another layer of components/feedback/response between the operation of something and the feedback about it.</p><p><strong>Visibility &amp; Response</strong></p><ul><li>For a system to respond to conditions on either an individual or collective level, indicators of those conditions need to be visible to responding systems.</li><li>Responding systems are the self-adjusting parts of a larger system which effect flows in the larger system.&nbsp; For example, people, businesses, banks, government agencies, etc. are each different types of responding systems in the economy.</li></ul><p><strong>Boundaries / Edge Conditions / Operating Conditions / Breakdown</strong></p><ul><li>If the only visible indicator of the condition of an integral flow is &ldquo;there / not&rdquo; which is the same as &ldquo;working / broken&rdquo; or &ldquo;alive / dead&rdquo; then you have a system which cannot sustain itself, because it doesn&rsquo;t &ldquo;know&rdquo; that it needs to adjust its behavior until its dead.&nbsp; (e.g. If you don&rsquo;t know you need to stop fishing a particular stock until you can&rsquo;t find it anymore, you&rsquo;ve caused the extinction of species.&nbsp; At the point, it&rsquo;s too late to modify your behavior to sustain the species.)</li></ul><p><strong>Time Lag &ndash; Systemic Response Speed</strong></p><ul><li>Based on the layers of uncoupling within a system and also certain cycles within that system, there may be lag time to see adjustments.&nbsp; Determining the amount of lag is critical to avoid under or over-correction. (e.g. Knowing how long it takes to stop your car or ocean freighter&hellip; Knowing that noon is peak sun but 2:45pm is peak heat.&nbsp; Knowing that June 21 is peak solar input, but July 21 is closer the peak heat, etc.)</li></ul><p><strong>Indeterminate Path</strong></p><ul><li>Part of the beauty and the challenge of living systems is that they are non-deterministic.&nbsp; They have multiple possible paths of action and response.</li><li>This is fantastic from a resilience and adaptability perspective, however, if feedback information may flow through a variety of different paths, it can be very difficult to ascertain the system lag and</li></ul><p><strong>Misaligned incentives &ndash; Types of misaligned incentives:</strong></p><ul><li>Systemic<ul><li>Expecting something to serve multiple purposes which have a fundamental conflict. (e.g. money being both a good medium of exchange and a good store of value.)</li></ul></li><li>Individual vs. Collective<ul><li>My &ldquo;get mine&rdquo; conflicts with the collective &ldquo;grow ours&rdquo;</li></ul></li><li>Individual vs. Individual<ul><li>My &ldquo;get mine&rdquo; conflicts with your &ldquo;get mine&rdquo;</li></ul></li></ul><p><strong>Distributed Intelligence</strong></p><ul><li>You can distribute more of the intelligence in an organization when the proper feedback loops are in place for it to be self-managing.&nbsp; However, the &ldquo;free market&rdquo; doesn&rsquo;t manage things well which it cannot see. (water quality, widespread resource depletion, soil quality, air quality, etc.)</li></ul><p><strong>Value Reference</strong></p><ul><li>To make a currency a good measure, it should have a reliable reference (such as kilowatts)</li></ul><p><strong>Selection of Value Reference or Determining a good Basket</strong></p><ul><li>What makes a good reference? Universality? Real/functional value?&nbsp; Incentive to optimize performance?&nbsp; Choosing kilowatts as a currency value reference, incents people to find more efficient ways of producing electricity.</li><li>A basket should be simple enough to update from real data within a marketplace on a periodic (daily? weekly? monthly?) basis for actual currency conversions.</li><li>It should be diverse enough to make it difficult for a small group of people to manipulate</li></ul><p><strong>System Swings / Vibrations / Dynamic Range</strong></p><ul><li>Pendulum</li><li>Poles (day/night, summer/winter, inhale/exhale, heart diastolic/systolic, waking/sleeping, tides, ebb/flow, etc.)<ul><li>The alternating pull between two (or multiple) states ensures the system stays dynamic, that things don&rsquo;t freeze up, fall to stasis.&nbsp; Homeostasis may be a misleading goal&hellip; rather freely adjusting within operating range.</li></ul></li><li>Are there systems with designed in multi-modal pulls/states?</li></ul>
