---
layout: page
title: ICO Craze
date: 2017-07-20 19:54:50 -0700
date_gmt: 2017-07-21 02:54:50 -0000
image: 		
status: 	publish
published: 	true
author: 	Arthur Brock
author_login: 	artbrock
author_email: 	artbrock@geekgene.com
author_url: 	http://artbrock.com
categories: 	[post]
comments: []
permalink: /2017/07/20/ico-craze
tags:
- ICO
- Trends
- Funding
---

# Raising the Bar on Integrity Amidst an ICO Craze

There has been some hoopla going on in the cryptocurrency crowdfunding space. A \$30 million raise in 24 seconds one day! \$152 million in one hour on the next! (Okay, a bit more than an hour.) \$200 million for this one! \$232 million for that one!

It's like the cryptocurrency rollercoaster ride has whole new twists and loops. People afraid they're going to miss out on winning it big

It feels like people are playing fast and loose with cryptocurrencies

In launching Holochain and our currency for application


Capitalization:
 - Not for raising your forever capital (just once), but for funding the first year of operations
 - Funding amount not just made up, but responsive to actual demand to use the system
 - ICO based on proof of concept, not a marketing pitch in a white paper
 - A structure which reflects the truth/reality of the process, not pretending people are making a donation for gambling tokens
 - Design the currency for value stability and lastingness, not for promises of 1000x returns and set up for pump and dumps.
 - An ICO is a type of crowdfunding, and we want the CROWD at least as much as the funding. If you let all your coins get eaten by bitcoin whales, you're probably not reaching your important stakeholders and early adopters. (And also making most of your supply subject to manipulation by those whales.)
 - We think it is possible to set up an ICO which is truly not a security, so you can successfully navigate the SEC and include users in the US.
 - Design for accountability -- Giving yourself millions of tokens vs. being accountable to your community for what they have invested by having that debt.
 - Money supply which expands/contracts
